[Music]
hey everyone welcome to the smart
economy podcast a production of
neon.pdf for programmable privacy in web
3 verticals such as defi Dows gaming and
much more in this episode we spoke about
the values and importance of onchain
privacy how the fair block team's
co-founders met how fair blocks privacy
Solutions can reduce costs for web 3
projects how fair block Solutions are
applicable to evm Cosmos and other L2
blockchains the forthcoming launch of
the fair block test net and much more
just a reminder nothing said on this
podcast is a solicitation to buy or sell
any tokens that nothing should be taken
as Financial advice that the host or
guests May hold tokens discussed in any
given episode and that you can check out
our disclaimer page on
neon.pdf economy podcast today we're
joined by payman m the CEO and
co-founder of fair block an R&D team
currently focused on protecting users
from blockchain front running using
applied cryptography how you doing today
payman great great really happy to be
here my of my favorite podcast that was
super cool that um you were giving some
Kudos uh beforehand about the types of
guests and and and the conversations
we've had on on the Pod so thank you so
much for listening I'm psych to have you
join the podcast um I kind of want to
just dump jump into the deep end with
you and um I know that asking kind of
like a super high Lev question can be
daunting but I think um in terms of
painting where this conversation's going
to go I think folks will really be
interested in hearing about this so I'm
just curious what are your highle
thoughts on the key privacy concerns
that people should have when it comes to
their onchain activity and kind of
coupled with that how can privacy and
transparency complement one another when
it comes to these onchain transactions
sure sure so I think like let's just
start with this way um privacy like for
I don't know some bad reasons and like
because of the regulations and also some
kind of bad leadership some kind of
Fanboy behaviors inside the crypto
ecosystem is often affiliated with I
don't know tornado Cash Money Laing tax
evasion North Korea this kind of stuff
but this is not the reality privacy is
like much bigger and we should somehow
normalize it and have some kind of fresh
wave of like privacy uh let's begin with
our like daily lives so even one of
those people who are saying that privacy
is bad like we should regulate them we
should like ban them they don't show
your their Bank balances to you like all
of those CEOs in their companies they
don't show anything about their
strategies even though they say that
we've got nothing to hide we are fully
compliant it's not in your best interest
to like fully like show everything that
you have in your hand like as a like as
a person as an individual or as an
company and uh sometimes it's not even
that serious it's not about like Finance
necessarily when we are playing poker
basically in your real life you don't
show your hand when you're playing your
bhip you show your like monitor to the
other guy right so it's like my point
here is really that in real life in like
when you vote when you're are playing
game when you are engaging with like I
any kind of financial activity it's like
common sense that you should show what
you've got right so if you are building
some kind of infrastructure to destroy
the bureaucratic systems like
traditional systems and putting them on
chain in decentralized way uh in a more
efficient and like user friendly way
this is a missing part it used to be
this one of the selling points of
blockchains alongside decentralization
but like because of the bad leadership
and the Fanboys and like I don't know me
robot fans uh I think it's like
completely ignored that it's like a
really natural and like important thing
to have on chain right and starting with
that so privacy is not just about like
hiding your activity it's just not
exposing it's just taking control of
your private data uh in various lay
layers of the ecosystem right so and
another problem here is that a lot of
solutions like ZK rollups and that ZK
project I don't know that FHA projects
like flash buts all of them are arguing
that we are solving the privacy problem
like complete but this is not the case
for like a lot of Sol like reasons
because privacy really has like
different layers it starts with your
like IP level in the like infra level so
projects like tour or n protect or like
any VPN they will protect you on the IP
level in the repb to sense somehow but
there is another thing about like zks is
that typically they are limited there it
takes a lot of time for gener the proof
but also the applications are limited
uh it can be used for sure for like
something like tornado cach mixing
Services um or ZK rollups but in ZK
rollups as we've seen They Don't Really
solve the ZK like privacy problem
because you are submitting all of the
data to the centralized server or like
posted onchain so I think we should
really understand like what we are doing
and what are challenges and um so let's
talk talk about threats I think one of
the remaining challenges is like having
unchain privacy at least some kind of
privacy
uh that protects the data inside your
messages your transactions and protect
you from like other people like
malicious activities malicious actors
like Bots like your competitors or also
like just enabling the basic logic of
application even in gaming or I know
governance or like defi auctions uh so
it's either about threats or like
building the application even like in
the first place and uh obviously there's
like the most popular version of like
having privacy is like encrypted M so
you can protect yourself from like bad
mbots who are sandwiching you explo
exploiting your uh transactions but I
think it's just like the since swapping
is the most popular activity and people
just know Unis Swap and they they get
front frun this is the only like popular
uh example of that which is like really
big every everybody talks about me but
if you think about me in the general
sense of like having asymmetrical access
to your information before executing
your transaction it can be sudden would
really be so in all of those examples
that I mentioned as a Blog proposer or
or like an infr provider sometimes
there's some kind of like privilege some
kind of asymmetrical advantage to you
that you see some kind of information
after the user or like other like
competitors and you can tweak that and
uh make more money or like I know censor
people and these are the reasons that
like we really need privacy for like
institutions who don't want to like
share their activities or like even like
mainstream users who don't want to like
front run their I know or fail their
orders or just want to like interact
with simple games that needs privacy on
CH U yeah sorry for the long answer no
that was awesome um you touched on so
many different things that I can't wait
to talk about um like privacy and
governance uh like random number
generation with games um me and sandwich
attacks with with defi but before we
jump into all of that and what Fair
block is doing to provide these
Solutions um before we started recording
you mentioned that you were you were
studying or you you did study for your
PhD so I'm just curious what's kind of
like your academic background what did
you study for undergraduate and then
what did you get your PhD in yeah sure
uh so I'm basically like I'm like one of
the reasons that I'm really care about
blockchains and the ideological level is
the fact that I I was unfortunately born
in a like unlucky place like Iran and in
Iran like I've tasted all of the like
bad parts of not having access to
Freedom internet like we didn't have
like really free internet we should like
use vpns like in a daily basis every
minute and like the power of like the I
don't know bad power of centralization
and even not having access to like the
free financial word because of the like
both of the government and also like
other governments like us uh who are
like basically sandwiching like normal
people by sanctions and all of the other
regulations and like people are
panicking so you don't have like any
access to any like flexibility to like
work and given that and also like my
experience living in Canada seeing U on
or like my experience living in Hong
Kong seeing the effect of not having
privacy like heavy targeted advertising
like Gathering your personal information
it like it's a I'm not saying that just
because I'm working on privacy is I
think it's like one of the important
problems to solve for every country and
we are like even like normal population
of like the us or other countries in the
west are realizing that after like all
of this stuff happening in the elections
or like all of the news and seeing the
power of centralized stuff that is
happening in all of the media right so
this is like my personal experience so I
really care about like Freedom privacy
and like
decentralization and basically combining
that with like seeing that the
traditional banking is really failing us
the the simples utility of blockchains
for like know money transfers and see
that it takes like know $50 to do a
simple bu transfer and it should do it
inar in branch in Canada or like us it
it makes us really think that it's not
the future so it's really hard to assume
that in 20 years we are still relying on
this kind of very like limited slow and
like halfhazard uh logical Finance right
so this was like my AAL background and I
started on machine learning because it
was cool and it's like still cool and
you can do a lot of magical stuff around
like 10 years ago I did a lot of
research I did my like undergrad
research in electrical engineering and
like machine learning and I did an
internship in homecoin which was very
interesting working in the like Center
of AI and working on things like chat
GPT that is like popular now six years
ago seven years ago and I was working
specifically on machine learning for
medical data or like psychology so in
all of these cases you should should
provide personal data to some kind of
centralized server it should be your DNA
your I don't know like EG signal of your
brain um your fingerprints and then like
they have some models to run some kind
of idea I don't know something about you
and send it back to you so it got me
really like concerned especially after
my job experience in something like an
Uber in Iran because they were like
collecting personal data without any
kind of privacy and they typically get
hacked on of these companies so I really
experienced the importance of having
some kind of like privacy infrastructure
I realized that privacy is not some
something like luxury of like having my
own boundary it's like has like really
deep effects in future if you share your
like DNA with chat B they will probably
send it to advertisers right or like
medical I don't know hospitals to Kaiser
so they can get back to you to and sell
drugs so I got really interested to have
some kind of um mechanism like fhe or
like I don't know sgx Technologies like
this kind of cryptographic magical bikes
so you can encrypt your data send it to
the server and run the model on top of
them and get get get the encrypted
result back to you right uh so this was
my intro to how to combine this kind of
like machine learning stuff with
cryptography magic boxes and then I
started at my gr School initially to
work on these but but I at the same time
I met my supervisor ser went off with
experience running the cryptographic
team in Agro and and like at that time
he was starting his path toward axlr so
I learned about the like learned about
the like possibilities of Applied
cryptography in blockchains first and
because they were using like Thal
signatures and I he introduced me to me
and it was like intellectually also very
interesting because me combines Finance
with Game Theory and like the
centralized systems and you can combine
it with cryptography and the the best
part is that people care you can
actually people are so like care about
what you're building suddenly people
care a lot about your cryptography in
libraries and what you are building and
you can have some kind of practical
applications Rel so you shouldn't wait
for your research or like library to be
realize in 30 years so this this was my
uh original story like except like I
don't know I've done obviously like
investments in crypto and buy out
Bitcoin but like this was my original
story my first uh step to working
professionally in crypto and blockchains
yeah that's super cool that you come to
it from more of a technology base um
specifically like using your your
background in machine learning and kind
of seeing how the sausage is made and
and how um companies can leverage the
data that we give them oftentimes we
don't know that we're giving them um to
sell us crap we don't need you know uh
America is onethird of the world total
um medical uh like GDP basically so like
America buys a third of the world's
medication um and we have like 365
million people here which is not even a
tenth of the world's population so I
guess um before we delve further when
you were in Iran did did Bitcoin come on
your radar did building on ethereum
anything like this um or were you just
kind of still focused on on on your
studies and kind of um paying attention
to the larger bigger technological
aspects of what
decentralized projects can provide no I
was like obviously very interested in
Bitcoin like we I I even like in 2014 I
had some kind of note in the University
with some other people or like in our
house because electricity in Iran is
like way cheaper than any other country
I was running like Bitcoin in the early
days was it was interesting from two
points like just like the new technology
the New Concept the philosophy of like
what brings value to the like assets
like what's backing in this transaction
fighting about this with my dad arguing
like I don't know this with my dad was
like really interesting that what's like
really value valuable as like currency
and running the technology like running
your full node distributor system it but
like really interesting and um one other
thing that is makes made made
interesting more for me even more than
of this is that in Iran the currency is
going down like every day in a very
interesting way and like we've tasted
the inflation and like all of the stuff
that people are just now getting just a
taste of that in the US like way before
in a way harsher way so this is the
reason that a lot of people in Russia
Iran or like turkey are actually holding
Bitcoin so like 30% of people are
holding Bitcoin they don't know anything
about blockchains or decentralized
network the only thing that they know is
that it's like really good thing to
secure your funds and not lose your cash
value right and uh obviously it also
opens like some kind of flexibility for
sending money to your family because you
cannot do that because of sanctions even
if you want to send some money for
tuition of your son in the UK so you can
use Teter um a lot of people are using
Teter inside turkey or like Russia to
just send money to their family and
these are my previous like understanding
of Bitcoin and what what I thought it
can be like interesting and people are
talking about that side of the thing
recently more and more uh but about the
technology I I like to be honest I
didn't know that that much right so I
just know about like miners hashing and
this kind of stuff but on the other side
of the coin like a bft mechanism or the
consensus mechanism and all of the
technical nues which is itself very
interesting engineering uh got me in the
gr School cool um something that I'm
curious to hear about is um and and
we're GNA dive into Fair Block in a
minute I promise um but you guys are
building uh privacy enabled solutions
for daps you're not just building like a
standalone blockchain so I'm just
curious um even though you guys do have
your own chain um I'm just curious
though what are your thoughts on um
privacy kind of composability like the
the the building blocks leveraging
privacy tools and what are the
opportunities or constraints that those
might have over like a privacy focused
chain like Monero or zcash or something
like secret Network yeah sure so I think
privacy is very important but it's not
defin it's just a very important feature
it's not the product itself right and as
we've seen even outside crypto people
nobody is actually using tour although
it has great engineering and like
protects you like privacy and all of
those stuff nobody like let's face the
reality nobody use that unless you are
like I don't know someone who really
care about that ons just test it out and
or maybe you've heard of I don't know
dark rib you want to try that but for
daily usage nobody use that and the
reason for that is that it's like two
reasons it's like really hard to install
another I don't know Explorer or run it
the ux is like really bad it's really
slow and also it Affiliates yours you
with all of those like bad players in
the dark it I know sing drugs so the pr
is also really bad and I think this is
exactly what has happened in crypto the
pr is obviously really bad it's like
even worse for privacy because of the
regulations all of the know tax evasion
hackers North Korea this kind of stuff
so people are really afraid to use the
skyus um tools since you can use it but
people like I know maybe the US
government will bad you later or like
ISU even if you've just like
committed vop right and then the other
thing is that the ux part we have some
kind of really interesting Solutions but
they are not where there are actual
users or like actual applications so
most of the users are are are some of
the major l1s or some of like l2s so it
can be like Solan ethereum like Cosmos
chains or like l2s but other than that
people there is no like real incentive
or real ation for people to switch to
some kind of a standalone privacy chain
uh just for privacy there may be some
kind of initial activity because of air
drop or like grants and other stuff but
it will eventually die and the lack of
liquidity and user makes it like worse
market for you uh so it's not a like
really good competitor to other
Solutions and the only like really
successful instance of public key
cryptography in reality outside repb to
I think is https https is ex exactly
protecting your communication uh from
all of those bots in early day all of
those like malicious parties in early
days of internet and someone came up
with this like really nice solution of
having uh publicy cryptography for
securing your communication where you're
just like contact uh interacting with
any website or any like web to
application and the success of that is
not really about like technical stuff
like how big is it or how secure is it
the success of that is like basically as
a developer it's really easy you just
get your certificate there is some kind
of organization it's like integration is
not that hard and even better for users
is you can see the lock button everybody
knows https everybody knows the lock
even my grandmother knows https but they
don't know what's happening in in behind
they don't know like tour right so my
vision for blackchain is that like
privacy is important and we should do
our best uh to have like have something
exactly where users need and where like
developers need that we shouldn't have
this kind of like learning curves or I
don't know buying tokens or changing
frontends there's only one way for
having like something like in privacy
space that makes sense and it's like
integrating it wherever like users need
need that and it's a obviously really
hard path like there's like a lot of
challenges a lot of uh technical
difficulties of integrating these
Solutions a lot of security assumptions
I think it was the try other path has
not been like really successful there's
like great I have great respect for
their work and everything but um it's
not something that I can imagine be the
case in 10 years um yeah no I you bring
up a lot of good points and I think uh
the the nuances are actually quite
hilarious because the most privacy
preserving transactions that any
American can do is buying something with
cash and um you're right like people
don't care about privacy they don't care
about personal data ownership we don't
care about any of this um because
oftentimes to download an app or to
leverage these kind of privacy oriented
Solutions requires taking an extra step
and the average uh application um
consumer wants something super simple
and super easy delivered to them as
quick as possible so they can start Doom
scrolling through whatever application
they just downloaded so there's a really
tricky kind of balance there but I think
luckily for us we're in a space in the
crypto space where at least the majority
of our users might actually care about
this so something I'm curious to hear
about um you guys did successfully um
conduct a fundraising round uh that
concluded uh at the end of last year but
before we talk about what got um your
investors psyched on what you guys are
working on I'm curious to hear hear the
origin story of fair block how did the
founding members find one another yeah
sure that's a good question so that's
actually the hardest part of an startup
so far for me finding like a good um
co-founder and so my my curent
co-founder is my is not my first chance
it's like somehow like dating you should
date few people quickly and F like
you're perfect man there's a lot of
things like technical you should
complete yourself in technical skills in
your like I don't know communication
skills but also like how you can
communicate with each other and many
many other like like sharing like same
values and other stuff and um it's
generally really hard to build something
from like zero to something together so
it's like basically like a life partner
so it's really important to find the
right partner and I think in crypto
investing in right people or like
General investors as a fer I think it's
like 80% of the path nobody cares about
what you are building right now because
there's not a lot of application or
users but we know that there's a lot of
smart people and you should start
building and eventually you should like
be one of the major companies or like
people inside the ecosystem so in my
path uh I started like we have a great
blockchain Club in University of BDO and
University of wo is historically a very
good place for all of know blockchain
companies starting with vitalik himself
optimism like Liam from optimism uh I
don't know Axel and Sergey tender
meetings also like not that far in like
a nearby City and conen so there is a
like good culture historically in
finance and blockchains and privacy with
blackberries headquartered in Waterloo
so people are generally interested and
there's a lot of great developers here
and uh I started like engaging with my
know blockchain Club in the University
of V I started my path as a like
researcher leading the research team and
I met my co-founder the current
co-founder uh in a hackaton in Toronto
in E Toronto when I was visiting them
with the club and we started talking
about technical things and how we can
like communicate together and the good
thing was that while I can cover
cryptography stuff like research and
stuff or designing the systems and
products he has a lot of actual native
experience uh in crypto like running MBS
himself as like one of the very first
people like running MV buts have a lot
of experience with tonics and like
really great developer like developer or
like go developer so somehow we compl
complement each other like skills and
mindset I think it was a really good uh
combination is is watero um I'm American
so I don't even know my own geography of
my country is waterl on the east coast
of Canada yeah it's like a pretty close
to Tonto okay cool um because we had
Nathan Windsor from Landslide on and
he's got heavy ties to the Avalanche
Cosmos ecosystems and those came from
Cornell so I'm just kind of like getting
the vibe that in the Northeast part of
the us and on the eastern coast of
Canada that there's probably like a
large technological Hub and we're just
kind of blessed that there's a lot of
blockchain activity um in 2022 I got to
travel to 10 different universities in
the US um schools I would have never
been able to get into like Berkeley um
University of Michigan and got to meet
all the blockchain clubs at these
universities and there was just so much
activity that was going on there I was
going to be surprised if all the
students we spoke with even finished
their schooling because of the cool
projects they were working on um that
they could have just dropped out and
started working on yeah a lot of people
are Dro like 10 years ago P students
were dropping off or like just very
exceptional students were dropping off
but right now it just if you are more
than
average dropping off to work in crypto
or AI uh I think it makes sense in
engineering it's because like that
practice is more important than the
science yeah I agree um so you kind of
spoke about how it's like dating to find
your co-founder the the person that you
can communicate with that that uh
matches your skill sets and also um has
different skills that you don't have and
vice versa you have skills that they
don't have um so when you're when you
get together and you guys align on the
value of privacy and you bring the
diverse skill sets um you with your
background in machine learning and your
co-founder who was building um uh like
me Bots and was just kind of tinkering
around in blockchain um there's a lot of
ideas and Concepts that you guys
probably are just blowing each other's
minds about but how do you decide um how
to narrow down and Whittle down and
focus on your sort of initial framework
what was that process like for fair
block and um maybe we can use this to
kind of talk about some of the products
that you guys have been building um as
an example for how you decided what to
really focus on sure sure so to create
something I didn't like I started my
idea on fbl uh not with my co-founder
like he joined me later so it actually
like going back to my story coming to gr
School in what I do and working with Ser
learning about me and like theal
cryptography or like other FH s ZK stuff
uh so I started working on me like B
prevention with like theold encryption
and I wrote my thesis and my like know
my paper and did a lot of research on
that uh so I got a really good so it was
like very early it was just like flash
bu and even themselves it's just it was
just a like caliz B and um yeah so I got
really good feedback about me itself it
was really interesting and prevention of
the bad side up with things while
keeping the good side up the things was
like an interesting idea to work on it
is it is still a really interesting
problem to work on um so this was my
original path and then to breach my sort
of engineering academic background to
the industry I went through like axar
Grand programs and Cosmos Grand got the
cosmos Grand which was like big and that
sort of took me to the next level so it
was like serious interest from the
industry to what I was working on in my
cryptography background and my
understanding of m space and then around
the same time while I was finalizing the
seat round uh I'm I met like my
co-founder so it was almost around the
same time and start you mentioned I I
just want to jump in um because you
mentioned that this is the second time
in our conversation you've mentioned a
grant um initially you mentioned that
grants might draw someone into the
ecosystem and then or into blockchain in
general and then you mentioned that you
got a cosmos Grant as well so what was
um maybe you can also uh share a little
more what was that process like how did
you go about looking for Grants uh for
ecosystems to build in um how did you
land on Cosmos and then maybe you can
kind of Leverage that to also talking
about the SDK and fairy ring yeah of
course so Cosmos I think it's really
interesting and it's like somehow
proving the point it's like proving the
point as we
grow but it's not just about like the
community or like what we can have there
I think the most important part of
Cosmos is like the abing Theses and the
technical flexibilities which are not
the same thing that there's lot of
technical flexibilities that you can
have experiment with them and build your
connections with other teams and there's
a lot of talent in general and we can
see the like flow of all of the ideas
from Cosmos to other ecosystems uh every
day uh one thing that I I started on me
prevention on l ium main net and as you
know there's a lot of challenges and
basically on technical level and also by
proving yourself to the inner circle of
people and on the technical level uh it
was a lot of it was like really
expensive because of gas consumptions on
that time and also you should only have
an smart contract at that time it was a
lot of technical challenges and the same
time I saw aar's architecture because of
Sergey and I realized that we can
actually have something very similar to
accr a blockchain but not just for
having you like separate technology
unlock ecosystem on top of that a
blockchain for like in their case are
providing cross chain transactions and
uh asset transfers or like General
message passing but in our case we are
providing uh decryption keys or like
privacy Services privacy tool keys in
general as a chain so while we are going
to have some applications on our own
chain but it's going to be really
General we can provide this this kind of
value the Privacy value and other kind
of applications uh to all custos chains
and like major l2s and this was the
reason and it makes a lot of sense
because in general cryptography normally
needs some kind of and um changes
modifications inside your own consensus
as like NPC solution or like even if if
you have sjx in your nodes so it's not
really like even practical having that
in all of the ethereum validators and we
can easily do that in Cosmos and we can
provide this value to other people while
we still have some kind of Security even
like ethereum validators can run our
chain or a cosmos rators can run our
chain uh this was the interesting part
and because it's even first is possible
the second part is that it abstracts
abstracts away all of the additional
costs of having as an example like
osmosis chain itself they've been talk
or like anoma they've been talking about
having theral encryption in their mro
but it was just an idea right they've
never executed the idea in practice and
the main reason for that is that you
should send like private keares in your
very own like meol and it basically
breaks the whole mol it's like expensive
it you don't have enough space for that
and my idea is that first of all we use
identity based encryption which reduce
the bandwidth overhead by a lot like
like 95% depends on the system size but
we don't want to generate keys for each
message is just for each block or each
condition uh that's like the technical
point of view but the an interesting
part to comp complete that is that we
don't need to even communicate between
our validators in that chain we can take
that do whatever we want in our own
chain generate the single key or like
whatever we want and like relay it
through IBC or like Fast surveys that we
have to like other customers chains or
like Ms so the flow idea is that you can
still send and cryp transactions or any
kind of like host any kind of privacy
preserving application on customers
chains uh either like the app chain
itself or on top of the chain or in l2s
like arbit Drome uh or these kind of
like roll kit sequencers and basically
everywhere you can host them you can
receive them and we can generate the
keys for you and Abstract away all of
the costs and send it uh to whatever
ecosystem that we want uh this is like
the main idea that got us really
interesting we started with like me
prevention just a high level encryption
of menol and protecting you from like
sandwiching specifically in the case of
swapping but we then realize that we are
not uh directly working on me like we
are working on me but it's just a subset
of what we are doing we are SOL uh we
are solving like much General problem
which which is unchain privacy like
protecting the contents of your
transaction as I mentioned it's not just
about me it can be about like limit
orders intense private governance gaming
Randomness generation sequencing
auctions for defi or infra or even like
NFD auctions so we realize that it has
like great potential and we can develop
our Partnerships and like applications
uh all of these ecosystems and bring it
to everywhere like anywhere that has a
lot of users and liquidity there will be
these kind of applications and we can
support yes so you mentioned that um
there's you started with me and then it
became apparent that um there's so many
verticals in the blockchain space
there's Dows there's defi there's nfts
there's governance so for for Defi and
and governance and um other sort of like
gaming Solutions uh the fair Block Chain
can act as kind of like the Privacy
layer based off of the different types
of encryption and decryption that you
guys use so something that to me um kind
of sticks out is you're able to you're
able to build the building blocks but
how will folks from other l2s other app
chains other nonm ecosystems like salana
or whatever um how will folks be able to
kind of use the building blocks that you
guys are creating what is going to be
included in Fair blocks SDK and how do
you kind of build um for your current
users who might be the developers like
what's the pipeline look like for
feedback yeah y yeah so one thing that I
I'm really proud of of what we are doing
in fbl is that we are not just like
research team or like working on like
fancy cryptographic stuff we've been
like very actively working with this
kind of like I know customers chains or
like applications on ethereum uh both on
like protal level or like infra level
and like l2s and there are like really
different projects and we either have
like some kind of project in house for
them or El we have some kind of shared
idea that they will use our um our
Network for building this kind of rabac
preserving applications and there's a
lot of technical challenges and nuances
on how it can actually work this kind of
Integrations and making it work and
making it easy for developers to build
is the most challenging part having it
inside our own chain and in like
isolated way we had that like one year
ago but during the last what year we've
been like mostly focused on making it
happen in a like chain agnostic way in a
sense and uh the way that it works is
that we have some kind of SDK it's
really different to be honest from
Cosmos ecosystem to arbitrum or I don't
know other l2s uh but there is the high
level logic is the same so if you are
CMOS chain you can easily install our
module uh I call it private intense
layer because intense in general sense
it's like whatever you want it's not
just defi it can like vs or like
everything else even gaming and we we
can have like a lane or layer of private
privacy preserving transactions in the M
Pool and it basically after installing
that module de all developers they can
start receiving encrypted transactions
directly so it is not through for like
after the install installation which
takes like I don't know half an hour uh
everyone all of the developers can like
use that flexibility so it can be any
like a smart contract or like something
that is baked in the like consensus and
they can install them they can they can
use this kind of flexibility and can
receive it it will be the block and
whenever they want to distribute
transaction we can provide that uh we
we've made it in a way that is like
really like easy to build um we've
actually hired one of our employees to
just focus on building applications uh
so we didn't had a lot of background
with consensus or like Cosmos or I don't
know l2s or whatever but he's a really
good application developer and it was a
really good for us good experiment for
us to build these kind of applications
and also to test our hypothesis that
it's actually possible for people to
build it and he's been actively like
developing different applications like
private governance uh gaming uh simple
defi transfers or like auctions on
different ecosystems on like arbit or I
know custos or other uh player tools so
I guess the way that we can make it even
easier for developers is that we are
going to open source this kind of
tutorials that we have this kind of
sample smart contracts in different
areas and it would be even much easier
they can take the code and change it in
a way that it um they can learn from
that and also like slightly modify that
to address their own needs and are you
are you starting to get a sense of who
your um part I guess Partners might be
are you you you mentioned that um these
privacy Solutions can be kind of
ubiquitous across the different
verticals in web 3 so are you starting
to see kind of like an early use case
emerging are a lot of folks that are
coming to you more interested in defi
are they more interested in in um
private governance are they more
interested in improving the kind of like
random number generators on chain for
games um what's kind of like the early
interest look like yeah so to be honest
like we've got like interest in onof
those like I'm not saying these
applications just we invent the cool
that the cool thing is that other people
have actually suggested these ideas and
we've like built it in a way that to
support them so like the traction is
reverse uh so just as an example for
private governance it was not a huge
thing for us we are like mostly an MV
part but we got like a big traction from
Customs ecosystem and we saw the
importance of governance and all of the
dramas per second in customs ecosystem
and having a private governance can
contribute a lot of value to custos or
it can be also deployed anywhere else as
well in any Dows on l2s uh it can make
the whole process uh more efficient
faster and also more accurate uh because
of a lot of reasons I don't want to go
into details so we got that we got the
traction rebuilt that then we realized
that people like U so optimism folks and
uh I believe few Cosmos chains they ask
us about Randomness generation protocol
which is not relying on a third party
it's like riable onchain and can be
easily relate so we realize that it's
not our main application but basically
the key that we are generating in in
each FL it it can be easily the source
of Randomness and we it was a really low
hanging fruit for us to build that and
uh for gaming uh it's obviously gaming
it's extremely Limited in Cosmos or like
ethereum like wherever to be honest and
by Gaming by now most of people just
think think of it as having digital
assets having like NFD inside Call of
Duty and this kind of stuff uh but it's
not it doesn't make it makes sense but
it's not the full potential of that
right Gaming Community I think it's
really big they're crazy the conferences
are 20 times bigger than like any crypto
conference so I think we should give
them a chance to have unchain gaming
which is can be kind of cool it's not
it's like crypto cuties like it's not
really un logical for me to understand
why it can be like very that big but
history has shown us that gaming is one
of sectors that can prove us wrong and
uh the point here is that we can have
all kind of gamings that needs to
prevent asymmetrical access to
information so passing this kind of sexy
buzzwords what I mean really is that you
can send your messages while other
competitors in the game cannot see them
so for example in betting um you can bet
on something and a future event on a
chain or like even like real world
events and while other people cannot see
your pets we can execute it onchain so I
think there's a huge potential for this
kind of really simple onchain um games
but to answer so just to summarize that
we've been like really focused on defi
because the whole thing in crypto is
defi so 95% of our forus is in defy so
everything like me prevention maybe in a
sense like front trining and sensorship
sequence sensorship resistance
sequencing and um interestingly seal bit
auctions for things like evx Unis swap X
PBS auctions M share auctions and this
is stuff but we we couldn't wait for
like other applications those were like
even easier for us to build and we've
already built them or like we are
building them in par they're like much
easier to operate and we we really
didn't want to not execute anything and
we are like executing them while we are
still path making our path to like
really much more serious projects yeah
I've been trying to get um um so uh I
earned my bread and butter by working in
the Neo blockchain ecosystem Neo is like
an OG Dino chain from 2016 2017 and one
of the projects I've consistently wanted
to get on chain is poker but if you run
an RNG then anybody can see um what the
numbers generated are and you could
easily cheat the game so it's a really
difficult problem to solve even though
it sounds really simple so um you
mentioned that 95% of your use cases
right now are Defi and I'm just curious
to hear a little bit more about um how
fair block can positively impact defi
because if I'm thinking about
implementing privacy pre preser
preserving features to me that sounds
like there's another step and I hope the
blocks are super fast because if they're
not like you know tender based 1 second
blocks you know maybe additional block
that takes a few more minutes or maybe
20 or 30 seconds to have another
transaction that um Shields my Identity
or hides my um limit order or any of
that it might add some uh downtime it
might decrease the speeds that these
privacy tools can provide for dii uses
so how how did you guys address that um
if if I'm using a di5 protocol in one
chain and I want ensure my security by
leveraging a fairy ring there's got to
be some cross-chain communication what
does how did you guys deal with that how
did you guys deal with um the perceived
kind of like reduction in speeds for
integrating privacy but also performing
kind of like quick defi um activities
sure so the answer for that is like
really application specific but I try to
answer it on a like really high level uh
so the good thing about us is that we've
like really focus on having some kind of
experience that doesn't need you to send
like two transaction so the KN way of
that is like I don't know hashing your
transaction sending it and then like
reing yourself which needs like two
transactions it's obviously much much
more expensive and also uh you may like
not reveal your transaction or your
private data later to cheat the system
so with us like we can use the very same
front end of those applications we don't
need to install I don't know Rost code
or another library in your local machine
to encryp your transaction it's going to
be integrated as a JS SDK in the front
end or in the wallet so you have the
power of controlling your data and what
you are disclosing publicly what part of
your private trans transaction is going
to be disclosed and it's you can choose
it you can have the freedom and encrypt
it and the good thing is that that's all
you see as a user you can encrypt it
send it to the current I know whenever
you were going to send send originally
and the inclusion is like seamless the
encryption encrypted transactions will
be ordered there and includeed in the
block like any other transaction the
challenging part is that what I say like
it's application specific is so for some
cases we need for like for example
swapping you need to uh have the
decrypted transactions right away the
way that we solve that is that you have
a transaction right now it's included
with other people but somewhere between
this BL and the next BL we are executing
it in a way that people cannot still
front run them uh so in this space in
the specifically in Cosmos we have other
Solutions in other ecosystem as well but
in Cosmos the way that it works is that
we have begin block or like finalized
block through ABCI Plus+ and you will
include the transaction it will be
included there but it will be decrypted
uh right away after the pl Tex
transactions of previous black and plain
Tex transaction of next BL so the good
thing is that there is no front running
opportunity and uh our audience doesn't
care about having the top of the plug
because they are not trying to FR on
other people they just want to have
their own uh transaction order and
they're not they were not even going to
get the top half the block without
encryption so like other transactions
they will get that I don't know
somewhere in the bottom of the Block in
ordering but in almost the same block so
this was just for for swapping for other
stuff like limit orders or intents it's
even like easier because in limit orders
we are not like necessarily going to
execute it in this blet almost never
happens uh you can put it put your
encryp your limit order and put the
condition for execution of that and
instead of relying your centralized
server for like holding on your I don't
know wet or like on your order like
private information uh you can put it on
chain so there's no like dark pool or
like centralized Solutions here you can
put it onchain in a like um L chain
worthy solution and while it's waiting
for execution other people um it's just
private and once in this case the prices
are met we can decry it and execute it
so the cool thing here is that other
people cannot see your strategy or like
the know amount of your limit order and
some other information uh it's like some
like the point that I'm trying to make
is that in this case it's we have zero
privacy we have full privacy but full
privacy doesn't help with execution we
are somehow in the Spectrum right uh we
are trying to be realistic with this and
for auctions in general auctions can be
like really uh interestingly useful in
Defi and the reason for that is that um
you can use use that like in many many
like infr level protocols for M share by
flash Bots or like execution tickets I
know lotteries uh in ethereum main it in
D DX they're having like batching
auctions like a skip team they're having
decentralized meev auctions and unit
swap they have like touch ordering
auctions right but auctions in general
like we have seid auctions and like
normal auctions and S auctions generally
promote a uh like more fair and
decentralized ecosystem for people to
interact because other people cannot see
your information while you are beaing
right or like there is another problem
in if you are running it in a
centralized format like centralized arer
like slash Bots or running it in a
public blockchain then there's always
the case that there there's a last Loop
problem the block proposer or the
centralized auctioner they can always
see the information and put a bit
themselves or like work with other
market makers or like liquidity
providers to only put their transaction
there only if they're like making
absolute profits so it's not like
predicting or competition it's basically
some kind of generalized me and in all
of these cases we we don't need to have
the auction um so not not all of these
cases in some cases you don't need to
have it like in inside this plug so we
can still have like a lot of time for
executing that in a lazy manner uh you
can encrypt your bits it will uh provide
like better values to the users at the
end of the day um but in the cases that
we can even we really need to have it
like in that specific chain we have some
ideas as well so like for in the case of
skipe one that I mentioned we are using
ABCI ++ and basically it will be
executed in the same BL um so my point
here is that it's like a ongoing area uh
it's very open and we are like fortunate
to be like one of the only few teams
that are working on that and we are
seeing like increasingly more interest
in this area like just yesterday
Paradigm um hosted something about like
seal Productions which is basically a
like very naive version of what we've
been building so far uh they are
proposing a s production but they have
like multiple rounds of interactions but
in this case in our implementation since
we are using identity base encryption or
like fhe and Thal enry decryption uh the
good thing is that we don't need any
like collateral or like any further runs
of communication people can basically
send their single message and it will
basically that's all um we don't need
any collateral or any like extra grounds
of communication I guess one one thing
that I really want to touch on that is
that privacy is not something that is
wisely adopted
in other Industries unless there is like
two um I think two conditions like one
condition is obviously major push back
from governments or users uh something
that we've seen with like Facebook with
like differential privacy and other
Solutions or like in Google like
cryptography schemes the other thing the
other way of having a successful privacy
preserving project is that privacy means
like more profit or like I don't know
something that is like incentive lined
with the the people with the user as as
well so it doesn't mean that you are
spending extra money to just get privacy
the interesting thing that really got me
in crypto is that in many many cases
having privacy it either introduced like
a better ux so like in auction or like
private governance it means that like
smaller window of time other other
people are not waiting for the very very
last minute for submitting their beats
or they are not updating their beats
because because of other side
information there's like one bit and
that's all in the same Block it's it's
finalized and it's better for users like
game theoretically it provides better
value because those Searchers are not
over optimizing everything so at the end
of the day it will be a better value for
the auction year themselves and all of
the end users like real end users of
blockchains and in other Solutions like
I don't know swapping or like intense
you are basically encrypting your
transaction to not lose money so you may
spend like $2 extra but you are saving
like hundreds of dollars of front
running like potential front running if
you are swapping so this is like really
interesting that having extra privacy
features almost in most cases means like
more potential like revenue or like not
losing uh money which which makes me
like really bullish on privacy
preserving infrastructures or
applications uh payman that's awesome uh
we're nearing the end of our time so um
if anyone who's out there whether you're
a dow uh a DEX uh a game your you're
building on ethereum and L2 or Cosmos
whatever it is um what's the best way
for uh these folks to get in contact
with you and your team yeah of course uh
so like we have like a Twitter account
and also our Discord Channel um I really
want to have like more feedback and
brainstorming with all of the builders
in the space and think lers would be
awesome to have them in our Twitter and
Discord awesome well payman thank you so
much for coming to talk about Fair block
and privacy preserving Technologies uh
it was a really fascinating discussion
um I really enjoyed learning more about
your background what kind of drives you
and what you guys are working on it's
it's really exciting and I look forward
to keeping my ears to the ground and
following the progress you guys make
thank you so much so our public test is
also launching at the beginning of March
and like we are really excited to work
with teams and like have already
interested in expressed their interest
in building with fairlock or like seeing
like new projects that may contact us
later so yeah keep your eyes out for
some updates thank you so much for
having me in this podcast uh it really
meant it meant meant a lot to me to be
here yeah it was this was a great
conversation and and you heard it here
folks um when test net test net next
month so be sure to to check it out and
and payment we look forward to having
you on a episode back in the future to
uh potentially look back on a lot of the
positives that uh strides that you and
your team were able to make um so thank
you so much for for joining the Pod and
uh we'll catch you later thank you so so
much for making it happen thank you well
what did you think of that conversation
I thought it was fascinating to learn
more about payon's background growing up
in Iran and how that experience has
shaped his ideology and philosophy about
free and open access to financial
systems and the internet I really
enjoyed learning more about the various
different types of use cases that this
privacy enhancing chain can provide for
different ecosystems and it was great to
delve into the positive virtues of
privacy and how this is just not
something that is valuable to criminals
but is beneficial to every person who
accesses these fair and open blockchain
networks to keep up to date with with
the podcast head over to
www.smart economy podcast.com and if
you've liked the guests that we've had
on the show please consider showing
support by rating and reviewing the show
on your favorite podcasting platform
every review and rating really helps us
get this show in front of more people's
eyes and ears and of course if you're a
neot token holder please consider voting
for Neo news today as your Council
representative we've proudly been
serving the Neo ecosystem since 20 17
and we'll continue to do so by putting
portions of our Council income directly
back into ecosystem growth initiatives
with all that said thank you so much for
taking the time to listen to the smart
economy podcast and we look forward to
catching you on the next
episode